# ML_Kiva_Crowdfunding
## Machine Learning I Final Project

### Aim
"Kiva.org is an online crowdfunding platform to extend financial services to poor and financially excluded people around the world". Kiva has provided data on their world-wide financial loans over the past two years on kaggle.com. Our aim is to apply machine learning methods to gain insight into how Kiva determines the amount (USD) and repayment interval type (monthly, bullet, or irregular) of each loan. Throughout this project, we hope to highlight the most important features in determining how Kiva administers loans. Given the number of data points in the original dataset, we have decided to focus on Latin American countries out of personal interest and to narrow our focus. Kiva provides features such as number of lenders, borrower's gender(s), loan use activity, and more. Our goals in this project are to build models to predict the loan amount (regression) and the repayment interval type (classification). This information can inform both lenders and borrowers in the Kiva crowdfunding process. To achieve these goals we will preprocess the data (merging, cleaning, handling identifiers and missing values, etc.), perform exploratory data analyses, split the data into training, validation, and testing sets, chose a variety of models for both regression and classification problems, and fine-tune the hyperparameters of those models.

### Results
In predicting Kiva loan amount, our regression models were able to run, yet were not very powerful predictive models based on their accuracy. The negative mean squared error, which would ideally be closer to 0 is quite far off at a level of -160,000 for the MLP regressor. This regressor was the best amongst the other two (Decision Tree and Random Forest). Given that MSE is the summation of the squares of the difference in predicted and actual value divided by the total number of data points, we would like this to be minimized. However, our accuracy in this case was measured by negative MSE, therefore, it should then be maximized. There are likely many reasons why this is a poor model for predicting loan amount, but we speculate that nature of the features we chose are not great indicators of the Latin American Kiva loan amounts under the given parameters.

Next, in our classification model predicting repayment interval type, our results reveal the best model to be Histogram Gradient Boosting with an F1 score of 0.874. Additionally, the next best models, Random Forest, and Multilayer Perception Classification both performed well with F1 scores above 0.80. According to our Random Forest Classifier, the top 5 features given in order of importance are: Loan Term (months), Country Colombia, Loan Amount, Agriculture and Livestock Activity, and MPI. Intuitively, due to the nature of money and loans, the Loan Term (0.317876 importance) and Loan Amount (0.0965385) are predictive of the Repayment Interval Type (monthly, bullet, irregular). Interestingly, Colombia has more predictive power than other Latin American countries (imporance of 0.0986365). If we recall some of our EDA plots, Colombia received the 3rd highest number of loans in Latin America and it was highly (negatively) correlated with repayment interval, our target. Agriculture and livestock is the second highest activity in Latin America and is also negatively correlated to repayment interval. MPI being the 5th most important at a value of 0.0824386, indicates that poverty level is playing an important role in Kiva loan activity.

In all, we were able to achieve our goals of building regression and classification models. However, our regression models predicting loan amount were weak, thus we cannot make conclusions about the features with respect to loan amount. On the other hand, our classification models were quite accurate in predicting repayment interval type. While this may not be the most informative information for Kiva, the model may be useful in determining what a borrowers repayment interval should be, given all other factors.
